
**NOTE! Information deprecated as of 22.11.2021**
# Joining the fgi.csc.fi Virtual Organization

Use of the FGCI computing environment is controlled through **Virtual
Organizations** (VO). A VO refers to group of users that utilize some
grid resource according to a set of resource sharing rules and
conditions. In turn, the grid resource providers use VOs to control the
access and usage of the grid resources. At a practical level, a
membership in a VO grants permission to use the grid resource. Virtual
Organizations are typically linked to a distinct set of grid resources
that are provided to some specific branch of science and/or geographical
region.

Currently all FGCI usage is controlled through the one VO called
*fgi.csc.fi*. This is the same VO that was previously used for FGI grid
and the name was preserved when FGCI was taken in use. In the future
there may also be other, more focused VOs in FGCI. The *fgi.csc.fi* VO
is open for all academic university researchers working in Finland.

Then go to [FGI Virtual Organization web page](https://voms.fgi.csc.fi:8443/voms/fgi.csc.fi)

This web page authenticates you using the personal X509 grid certificate
installed in your browser. Therefore it is preferred that you use the
same machine and browser for obtaining both the certificate and for
joining the VO.

In the FGI VO web page, fill the form with you personal information and
read the Acceptable Use Policy and accept it. After that you will
receive an e-mail confirmation request in your mailbox. Please follow
the instructions in that e-mail. After finishing the VO membership
application process it will take some time before the VO membership is
activated. Normally the membership will be activated within one working
day after the application process is finished.

